index.md, before:

---
layout: default
title: {{ site.name }}
---

# Welcome!  New to Cytoflow?  Start with [a screencast.](https://youtu.be/rl1c4SlAfvU)

# What's wrong with other packages?  

Packages such as FACSDiva and FlowJo are focused on primarily on **identifying
and counting subpopulations** of cells.  While this is important for many
different applications, it reflects flow cytometry's origins in separating
mixtures of cells based on differential staining of their cell surface markers.

Recent experiments in our lab and others have been more interested in
using a cytometer to **compare distributions** of cells, asking how these
distributions change in response to **experimental variables.** Existing
packages don't handle this gracefully!

# How is Cytoflow different?

* An emphasis on **metadata**.  CytoFlow assumes that you are measuring
  fluorescence on several samples that were treated differently: either
  they were collected at different times, treated with varying levels
  of inducers, etc.  You specify the conditions for each sample up front,
  then use those conditions to control the analysis.

* Cytometry analysis represented as a **workflow**. Operations such as
    gating and compensation are applied sequentially; a workflow can be 
    saved and re-used, or shared with your coworkers.

* **Easy to use.**  Sane defaults; good documentation; focused on doing one
  thing and doing it well.

* **Good visualization.**  I don't know about you, but I'm getting really
  tired of FACSDiva plots.

* The point-and-click interface is built on **Python modules**.  Do you 
  analyze data with Python?  If so, head over to the 
  [developer documentation](https://cytoflow.readthedocs.io/) to use these 
  modules in your own workflow.  They have been designed to work well in a 
  [Jupyter notebook](http://jupyter.org/); in fact, the GUI will soon export 
  a workflow directly to a notebook!

* **Free and open-source.**  Download the source code from 
  [the GitHub project page](https://github.com/bpteague/cytoflow) and modify it 
  to suit your own needs, then contribute your changes back so the rest of 
  the community can benefit from them.

## Note: this is still beta software!  Caveat emptor!
  
# Installation

**There isn't any!**  The binaries at the top of the page are all you need.
On a Mac, you'll have to extract the ZIP archive -- then, just double-click
to start the program!  It takes a minute to decompress the one-click archive
before it runs, though, so be patient.

# Documentation

The [developer documentation](https://cytoflow.readthedocs.io/) is quite
complete, but the GUI documentation is lagging.  A good introduction is
[the screencast on Youtube.](https://youtu.be/rl1c4SlAfvU)  **NOTE**: This
screencast is for an older version.  Several new screencasts will be along 
shortly.

# Help!  I found a bug!

First, are you using the current version?  To check, which version 
you're using, go to the Help menu (Windows) or Cytoflow menu (Mac)
and choose "About Cytoflow...".

You can also try to reproduce the bug in the latest build from git HEAD. 
Those binaries are [on BinTray](https://bintray.com/bpteague/cytoflow/cytoflow#files).

If you have found a bug in the most recent version, there are three ways to 
report it.  First, you can navigate to the Help menu and choose "Report a 
problem...".  This will open an email to the developers, including some 
information about the version of cytoflow you're using and some logs.

Second, you can join the 
[cytoflow-dev](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/cytoflow-dev) 
mailing list and communicate your bug to the developers directly.

Finally, you can submit your bug report to the 
[Github issues tracker](https://github.com/bpteague/cytoflow/issues).

# I want to keep up with new Cytoflow releases!

Great!  Subscribe to 
[cytoflow-announce](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/cytoflow-announce) 
and we'll send you an email when a new version is released.


# Are there screenshots?

[There are screenshots.]({{ site.baseurl }}/screenshots.html)

Commit message:

Add link to py3k packages

index.md, after:

---
layout: default
title: {{ site.name }}
---
# Welcome!  New to Cytoflow?  Start with [a screencast.](https://youtu.be/rl1c4SlAfvU)

# Are you on MacOS?  A recent update has broken Cytoflow on MacOS.  You can get experimental packages that should fix the problem [here](https://bintray.com/bpteague/cytoflow/cytoflow-py3k/v1#files)

# What's wrong with other packages?  

Packages such as FACSDiva and FlowJo are focused on primarily on **identifying
and counting subpopulations** of cells.  While this is important for many
different applications, it reflects flow cytometry's origins in separating
mixtures of cells based on differential staining of their cell surface markers.

Recent experiments in our lab and others have been more interested in
using a cytometer to **compare distributions** of cells, asking how these
distributions change in response to **experimental variables.** Existing
packages don't handle this gracefully!

# How is Cytoflow different?

* An emphasis on **metadata**.  CytoFlow assumes that you are measuring
  fluorescence on several samples that were treated differently: either
  they were collected at different times, treated with varying levels
  of inducers, etc.  You specify the conditions for each sample up front,
  then use those conditions to control the analysis.

* Cytometry analysis represented as a **workflow**. Operations such as
    gating and compensation are applied sequentially; a workflow can be 
    saved and re-used, or shared with your coworkers.

* **Easy to use.**  Sane defaults; good documentation; focused on doing one
  thing and doing it well.

* **Good visualization.**  I don't know about you, but I'm getting really
  tired of FACSDiva plots.

* The point-and-click interface is built on **Python modules**.  Do you 
  analyze data with Python?  If so, head over to the 
  [developer documentation](https://cytoflow.readthedocs.io/) to use these 
  modules in your own workflow.  They have been designed to work well in a 
  [Jupyter notebook](http://jupyter.org/); in fact, the GUI will soon export 
  a workflow directly to a notebook!

* **Free and open-source.**  Download the source code from 
  [the GitHub project page](https://github.com/bpteague/cytoflow) and modify it 
  to suit your own needs, then contribute your changes back so the rest of 
  the community can benefit from them.

## Note: this is still beta software!  Caveat emptor!
  
# Installation

**There isn't any!**  The binaries at the top of the page are all you need.
On a Mac, you'll have to extract the ZIP archive -- then, just double-click
to start the program!  It takes a minute to decompress the one-click archive
before it runs, though, so be patient.

# Documentation

The [developer documentation](https://cytoflow.readthedocs.io/) is quite
complete, but the GUI documentation is lagging.  A good introduction is
[the screencast on Youtube.](https://youtu.be/rl1c4SlAfvU)  **NOTE**: This
screencast is for an older version.  Several new screencasts will be along 
shortly.

# Help!  I found a bug!

First, are you using the current version?  To check, which version 
you're using, go to the Help menu (Windows) or Cytoflow menu (Mac)
and choose "About Cytoflow...".

You can also try to reproduce the bug in the latest build from git HEAD. 
Those binaries are [on BinTray](https://bintray.com/bpteague/cytoflow/cytoflow#files).

If you have found a bug in the most recent version, there are three ways to 
report it.  First, you can navigate to the Help menu and choose "Report a 
problem...".  This will open an email to the developers, including some 
information about the version of cytoflow you're using and some logs.

Second, you can join the 
[cytoflow-dev](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/cytoflow-dev) 
mailing list and communicate your bug to the developers directly.

Finally, you can submit your bug report to the 
[Github issues tracker](https://github.com/bpteague/cytoflow/issues).

# I want to keep up with new Cytoflow releases!

Great!  Subscribe to 
[cytoflow-announce](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/cytoflow-announce) 
and we'll send you an email when a new version is released.


# Are there screenshots?

[There are screenshots.]({{ site.baseurl }}/screenshots.html)
